---
date: '2025-11-04'
draft: true
toc: true
title: 'OF LOVE AND FEAR AND COURAGE AND HUMANS'
---
A couple of days ago, I was sitting in a cafe, talking to a friend about affection, courage, and fear of the future. As we were talking, we started to discuss emotions and their relationship to Zukunftsangst. One particular question we tried to answer got stuck in my head: ‘How can we be certain that feelings and love will remain for years?’ Within that question sits in my opinion Zukunftsangst. We talked about this for a while, but it continued to work in me over the past days. I don't think there is a right or a wrong answer, but here is my view on this question.

# The brain and the future

Contrary to what I thought in the past, we primarily remember not because we believe the past is something worth keeping but to have a guiding light for the future. My experiences, people I encountered, struggles, and hardships, blissful moments all help me to figure out how to find my way without walking in the same traps over and over again. This is a very good feature of our nature. It allows us to develop and learn.

However, most of us have a crucial limit on our abilities to recall a memory or think about the future: We are not good at picturing more extended periods. When I think about the past or future, I have images, or at best, "short" clips I can reproduce. For example, I can't think about my entire time in Japan in 2018. I have memories of events and people, but I don't have a film I can play in my head. I can imagine my graduation, but I am having a hard time picturing the next 18 months until that point. What does that mean for affection, happiness, or sadness? In this regard, I think this "feature" creates a distortion when we think about it in the future. This distortion has, in turn, ramifications for the present. Affection, happiness, grief, and most other complex emotions are not easily depicted in a picture. Affection develops over time. Happiness is not an emotional state that crashes over you like a wave and then subsides; it develops gradually. There is a good reason that we differentiate between despair and sadness. Despair is acute and serves a good picture. Grief is much more stretched out. Hard to picture in our mind, right?

So, the reality of feeling our feelings is something that we can't picture easily. We don't have the mental capacity to do so. We are hopelessly overwhelmed by the attempt. When I try, I tend to portray extremes. The pictures I create are loaded to the brim with intense emotions good or bad. In me, this creates a certain level of fear and a tendency to retract. I wear my psychological armor. It is necessary to protect myself from these future emotional impacts, or is it? I don't think so. Our conversation revealed something to me. It is like looking at the world through a unique kaleidoscope. We have fractures and shards of the actual world in our heads. Pictures of dark valleys and sunlit mountain tops, but they don't represent the reality that lies ahead of us. We don't know the future, but it is certainly not an endless streak of extreme emotions. But, too often, we run away from our minds; we run because these images appear to us as scary, evil, and uncontrollable monsters. I have done so in the past, and I freely admit that.

# Does this lead somewhere?

I think it is essential to think about this less as a deficit and more as one of the great features of life. I don't want to be able to picture things as a movie. Why would I want to dare anything then, if I could imagine so much? These fears and uncertainties are powerful impulse-setters that we all have to discover in our life, especially if you are as sensitive and hesitant as I am. Often, life is scary, opening up to people is scary, affection is scary, truth is scary, but they also are the most beautiful things we can experience in life. We should stop using our internal kaleidoscope to form our expectations of the future. Deciding on what we do base on the emotional turmoil that rallies our minds is not always useful and cuts us off from meaningful experiences. We have to strip down our armor and embrace that we have these inner demons. For me, I try to accept this feature of my brain and the fears and emotional monsters that storm in me. I trust myself that I will make the right decisions at the appropriate time. I stick to the truth as openly as I can because truthfulness helps us to inoculate us from our fears. It allows us to accept us as we are. As a consequence, I want to dare things in the present so that I can figure them out for me in the future. Living within this realization, is the profound understanding that emotions only overlay with the actual reality in the present. It is therefore on us to grow and face ourselves here and now. To come back to the initial question, we can't be sure about the future, and about what we will feel. It can be love or sadness or happiness or all of them together. But staying in paralysis lets us miss out on all of them. I, therefore, think it is wiser to ask ourselves a different question: What will we miss in the future by running away from Zukunftsangst in the present?
